Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 4171–4186
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019.c⃝2019 Association for Computational Linguistics
4171
BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for
Language Understanding
Jacob Devlin Ming-Wei Chang Kenton Lee Kristina Toutanova
Google AI Language
{jacobdevlin,mingweichang,kentonl,kristout}@google.com
Abstract
We introduce a new language representa-
tion model called BERT, which stands for
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers. Unlike recent language repre-
sentation models (Peters et al., 2018a; Rad-
ford et al., 2018), BERT is designed to pre-
train deep bidirectional representations from
unlabeled text by jointly conditioning on both
left and right context in all layers. As a re-
sult, the pre-trained BERT model can be ﬁne-
tuned with just one additional output layer
to create state-of-the-art models for a wide
range of tasks, such as question answering and
language inference, without substantial task-
speciﬁc architecture modiﬁcations.
BERT is conceptually simple and empirically
powerful. It obtains new state-of-the-art re-
sults on eleven natural language processing
tasks, including pushing the GLUE score to
80.5% (7.7% point absolute improvement),
MultiNLI accuracy to 86.7% (4.6% absolute
improvement), SQuAD v1.1 question answer-
ing Test F1 to 93.2 (1.5 point absolute im-
provement) and SQuAD v2.0 Test F1 to 83.1
(5.1 point absolute improvement).
1 Introduction
Language model pre-training has been shown to
be effective for improving many natural language
processing tasks (Dai and Le, 2015; Peters et al.,
2018a; Radford et al., 2018; Howard and Ruder,
2018). These include sentence-level tasks such as
natural language inference (Bowman et al., 2015;
Williams et al., 2018) and paraphrasing (Dolan
and Brockett, 2005), which aim to predict the re-
lationships between sentences by analyzing them
holistically, as well as token-level tasks such as
named entity recognition and question answering,
where models are required to produce ﬁne-grained
output at the token level (Tjong Kim Sang and
De Meulder, 2003; Rajpurkar et al., 2016).
There are two existing strategies for apply-
ing pre-trained language representations to down-
stream tasks: feature-based and ﬁne-tuning. The
feature-based approach, such as ELMo (Peters
et al., 2018a), uses task-speciﬁc architectures that
include the pre-trained representations as addi-
tional features. The ﬁne-tuning approach, such as
the Generative Pre-trained Transformer (OpenAI
GPT) (Radford et al., 2018), introduces minimal
task-speciﬁc parameters, and is trained on the
downstream tasks by simply ﬁne-tuning all pre-
trained parameters. The two approaches share the
same objective function during pre-training, where
they use unidirectional language models to learn
general language representations.
We argue that current techniques restrict the
power of the pre-trained representations, espe-
cially for the ﬁne-tuning approaches. The ma-
jor limitation is that standard language models are
unidirectional, and this limits the choice of archi-
tectures that can be used during pre-training. For
example, in OpenAI GPT, the authors use a left-to-
right architecture, where every token can only at-
tend to previous tokens in the self-attention layers
of the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017). Such re-
strictions are sub-optimal for sentence-level tasks,
and could be very harmful when applying ﬁne-
tuning based approaches to token-level tasks such
as question answering, where it is crucial to incor-
porate context from both directions.
In this paper, we improve the ﬁne-tuning based
approaches by proposing BERT: Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers.
BERT alleviates the previously mentioned unidi-
rectionality constraint by using a “masked lan-
guage model” (MLM) pre-training objective, in-
spired by the Cloze task (Taylor, 1953). The
masked language model randomly masks some of
the tokens from the input, and the objective is to
predict the original vocabulary id of the masked
4172
word based only on its context. Unlike left-to-
right language model pre-training, the MLM ob-
jective enables the representation to fuse the left
and the right context, which allows us to pre-
train a deep bidirectional Transformer. In addi-
tion to the masked language model, we also use
a “next sentence prediction” task that jointly pre-
trains text-pair representations. The contributions
of our paper are as follows:
• We demonstrate the importance of bidirectional
pre-training for language representations. Un-
like Radford et al. (2018), which uses unidirec-
tional language models for pre-training, BERT
uses masked language models to enable pre-
trained deep bidirectional representations. This
is also in contrast to Peters et al. (2018a), which
uses a shallow concatenation of independently
trained left-to-right and right-to-left LMs.
• We show that pre-trained representations reduce
the need for many heavily-engineered task-
speciﬁc architectures. BERT is the ﬁrst ﬁne-
tuning based representation model that achieves
state-of-the-art performance on a large suite
of sentence-level and token-level tasks, outper-
forming many task-speciﬁc architectures.
• BERT advances the state of the art for eleven
NLP tasks. The code and pre-trained mod-
els are available at https://github.com/
google-research/bert.
2 Related Work
There is a long history of pre-training general lan-
guage representations, and we brieﬂy review the
most widely-used approaches in this section.
2.1 Unsupervised Feature-based Approaches
Learning widely applicable representations of
words has been an active area of research for
decades, including non-neural (Brown et al., 1992;
Ando and Zhang, 2005; Blitzer et al., 2006) and
neural (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et al.,
2014) methods. Pre-trained word embeddings
are an integral part of modern NLP systems, of-
fering signiﬁcant improvements over embeddings
learned from scratch (Turian et al., 2010). To pre-
train word embedding vectors, left-to-right lan-
guage modeling objectives have been used (Mnih
and Hinton, 2009), as well as objectives to dis-
criminate correct from incorrect words in left and
right context (Mikolov et al., 2013).
These approaches have been generalized to
coarser granularities, such as sentence embed-
dings (Kiros et al., 2015; Logeswaran and Lee,
2018) or paragraph embeddings (Le and Mikolov,
2014). To train sentence representations, prior
work has used objectives to rank candidate next
sentences (Jernite et al., 2017; Logeswaran and
Lee, 2018), left-to-right generation of next sen-
tence words given a representation of the previous
sentence (Kiros et al., 2015), or denoising auto-
encoder derived objectives (Hill et al., 2016).
ELMo and its predecessor (Peters et al., 2017,
2018a) generalize traditional word embedding re-
search along a different dimension. They extract
context-sensitive features from a left-to-right and a
right-to-left language model. The contextual rep-
resentation of each token is the concatenation of
the left-to-right and right-to-left representations.
When integrating contextual word embeddings
with existing task-speciﬁc architectures, ELMo
advances the state of the art for several major NLP
benchmarks (Peters et al., 2018a) including ques-
tion answering (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), sentiment
analysis (Socher et al., 2013), and named entity
recognition (Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder,
2003). Melamud et al. (2016) proposed learning
contextual representations through a task to pre-
dict a single word from both left and right context
using LSTMs. Similar to ELMo, their model is
feature-based and not deeply bidirectional. Fedus
et al. (2018) shows that the cloze task can be used
to improve the robustness of text generation mod-
els.
2.2 Unsupervised Fine-tuning Approaches
As with the feature-based approaches, the ﬁrst
works in this direction only pre-trained word em-
bedding parameters from unlabeled text (Col-
lobert and Weston, 2008).
More recently, sentence or document encoders
which produce contextual token representations
have been pre-trained from unlabeled text and
ﬁne-tuned for a supervised downstream task (Dai
and Le, 2015; Howard and Ruder, 2018; Radford
et al., 2018). The advantage of these approaches
is that few parameters need to be learned from
scratch. At least partly due to this advantage,
OpenAI GPT (Radford et al., 2018) achieved pre-
viously state-of-the-art results on many sentence-
level tasks from the GLUE benchmark (Wang
et al., 2018a). Left-to-right language model-
4173
BERT BERT
E[CLS] E1  E[SEP]... EN E1’ ... EM’
C
 T1
 T[SEP]...
 TN
 T1’ ...
 TM’
[CLS] Tok 1  [SEP]... Tok N Tok 1 ... TokM
Question Paragraph
Start/End Span
BERT
E[CLS] E1  E[SEP]... EN E1’ ... EM’
C
 T1
 T[SEP]...
 TN
 T1’ ...
 TM’
[CLS] Tok 1  [SEP]... Tok N Tok 1 ... TokM
Masked Sentence A Masked Sentence B
Pre-training Fine-Tuning
NSP Mask LM Mask LM
Unlabeled Sentence A and B Pair 
SQuAD
Question Answer Pair
NERMNLI
Figure 1: Overall pre-training and ﬁne-tuning procedures for BERT. Apart from output layers, the same architec-
tures are used in both pre-training and ﬁne-tuning. The same pre-trained model parameters are used to initialize
models for different down-stream tasks. During ﬁne-tuning, all parameters are ﬁne-tuned. [CLS] is a special
symbol added in front of every input example, and [SEP] is a special separator token (e.g. separating ques-
tions/answers).
ing and auto-encoder objectives have been used
for pre-training such models (Howard and Ruder,
2018; Radford et al., 2018; Dai and Le, 2015).
2.3 Transfer Learning from Supervised Data
There has also been work showing effective trans-
fer from supervised tasks with large datasets, such
as natural language inference (Conneau et al.,
2017) and machine translation (McCann et al.,
2017). Computer vision research has also demon-
strated the importance of transfer learning from
large pre-trained models, where an effective recipe
is to ﬁne-tune models pre-trained with Ima-
geNet (Deng et al., 2009; Yosinski et al., 2014).
3 BERT
We introduce BERT and its detailed implementa-
tion in this section. There are two steps in our
framework: pre-training and ﬁne-tuning. Dur-
ing pre-training, the model is trained on unlabeled
data over different pre-training tasks. For ﬁne-
tuning, the BERT model is ﬁrst initialized with
the pre-trained parameters, and all of the param-
eters are ﬁne-tuned using labeled data from the
downstream tasks. Each downstream task has sep-
arate ﬁne-tuned models, even though they are ini-
tialized with the same pre-trained parameters. The
question-answering example in Figure 1 will serve
as a running example for this section.
A distinctive feature of BERT is its uniﬁed ar-
chitecture across different tasks. There is mini-
mal difference between the pre-trained architec-
ture and the ﬁnal downstream architecture.
Model Architecture BERT’s model architec-
ture is a multi-layer bidirectional Transformer en-
coder based on the original implementation de-
scribed in Vaswani et al. (2017) and released in
the tensor2tensor library.1 Because the use
of Transformers has become common and our im-
plementation is almost identical to the original,
we will omit an exhaustive background descrip-
tion of the model architecture and refer readers to
Vaswani et al. (2017) as well as excellent guides
such as “The Annotated Transformer.”2
In this work, we denote the number of layers
(i.e., Transformer blocks) as L, the hidden size as
H, and the number of self-attention heads as A.3
We primarily report results on two model sizes:
BERTBASE (L=12, H=768, A=12, Total Param-
eters=110M) and BERTLARGE (L=24, H=1024,
A=16, Total Parameters=340M).
BERTBASE was chosen to have the same model
size as OpenAI GPT for comparison purposes.
Critically, however, the BERT Transformer uses
bidirectional self-attention, while the GPT Trans-
former uses constrained self-attention where every
token can only attend to context to its left.4
1https://github.com/tensorﬂow/tensor2tensor
2http://nlp.seas.harvard.edu/2018/04/03/attention.html
3In all cases we set the feed-forward/ﬁlter size to be 4H,
i.e., 3072 for the H = 768and 4096 for the H = 1024.
4We note that in the literature the bidirectional Trans-
4174
Input/Output Representations To make BERT
handle a variety of down-stream tasks, our input
representation is able to unambiguously represent
both a single sentence and a pair of sentences
(e.g., ⟨Question, Answer ⟩) in one token sequence.
Throughout this work, a “sentence” can be an arbi-
trary span of contiguous text, rather than an actual
linguistic sentence. A “sequence” refers to the in-
put token sequence to BERT, which may be a sin-
gle sentence or two sentences packed together.
We use WordPiece embeddings (Wu et al.,
2016) with a 30,000 token vocabulary. The ﬁrst
token of every sequence is always a special clas-
siﬁcation token ( [CLS]). The ﬁnal hidden state
corresponding to this token is used as the ag-
gregate sequence representation for classiﬁcation
tasks. Sentence pairs are packed together into a
single sequence. We differentiate the sentences in
two ways. First, we separate them with a special
token ([SEP]). Second, we add a learned embed-
ding to every token indicating whether it belongs
to sentence A or sentence B. As shown in Figure 1,
we denote input embedding as E, the ﬁnal hidden
vector of the special [CLS] token as C ∈RH,
and the ﬁnal hidden vector for the ith input token
as Ti ∈RH.
For a given token, its input representation is
constructed by summing the corresponding token,
segment, and position embeddings. A visualiza-
tion of this construction can be seen in Figure 2.
3.1 Pre-training BERT
Unlike Peters et al. (2018a) and Radford et al.
(2018), we do not use traditional left-to-right or
right-to-left language models to pre-train BERT.
Instead, we pre-train BERT using two unsuper-
vised tasks, described in this section. This step
is presented in the left part of Figure 1.
Task #1: Masked LM Intuitively, it is reason-
able to believe that a deep bidirectional model is
strictly more powerful than either a left-to-right
model or the shallow concatenation of a left-to-
right and a right-to-left model. Unfortunately,
standard conditional language models can only be
trained left-to-right or right-to-left, since bidirec-
tional conditioning would allow each word to in-
directly “see itself”, and the model could trivially
predict the target word in a multi-layered context.
former is often referred to as a “Transformer encoder” while
the left-context-only version is referred to as a “Transformer
decoder” since it can be used for text generation.
In order to train a deep bidirectional representa-
tion, we simply mask some percentage of the input
tokens at random, and then predict those masked
tokens. We refer to this procedure as a “masked
LM” (MLM), although it is often referred to as a
Cloze task in the literature (Taylor, 1953). In this
case, the ﬁnal hidden vectors corresponding to the
mask tokens are fed into an output softmax over
the vocabulary, as in a standard LM. In all of our
experiments, we mask 15% of all WordPiece to-
kens in each sequence at random. In contrast to
denoising auto-encoders (Vincent et al., 2008), we
only predict the masked words rather than recon-
structing the entire input.
Although this allows us to obtain a bidirec-
tional pre-trained model, a downside is that we
are creating a mismatch between pre-training and
ﬁne-tuning, since the [MASK] token does not ap-
pear during ﬁne-tuning. To mitigate this, we do
not always replace “masked” words with the ac-
tual [MASK] token. The training data generator
chooses 15% of the token positions at random for
prediction. If the i-th token is chosen, we replace
the i-th token with (1) the [MASK] token 80% of
the time (2) a random token 10% of the time (3)
the unchanged i-th token 10% of the time. Then,
Ti will be used to predict the original token with
cross entropy loss. We compare variations of this
procedure in Appendix C.2.
Task #2: Next Sentence Prediction (NSP)
Many important downstream tasks such as Ques-
tion Answering (QA) and Natural Language Infer-
ence (NLI) are based on understanding the rela-
tionship between two sentences, which is not di-
rectly captured by language modeling. In order
to train a model that understands sentence rela-
tionships, we pre-train for a binarized next sen-
tence prediction task that can be trivially gener-
ated from any monolingual corpus. Speciﬁcally,
when choosing the sentencesA and B for each pre-
training example, 50% of the time B is the actual
next sentence that follows A (labeled as IsNext),
and 50% of the time it is a random sentence from
the corpus (labeled as NotNext). As we show
in Figure 1, C is used for next sentence predic-
tion (NSP). 5 Despite its simplicity, we demon-
strate in Section 5.1 that pre-training towards this
task is very beneﬁcial to both QA and NLI. 6
5The ﬁnal model achieves 97%-98% accuracy on NSP.
6The vector C is not a meaningful sentence representation
without ﬁne-tuning, since it was trained with NSP.
4175
[CLS] he likes play ##ing [SEP]my dog is cute [SEP]Input
E[CLS] Ehe Elikes Eplay E##ing E[SEP]Emy Edog Eis Ecute E[SEP]
Token
Embeddings
EA EB EB EB EB EBEA EA EA EA EASegment
Embeddings
E0 E6 E7 E8 E9 E10E1 E2 E3 E4 E5Position
Embeddings
Figure 2: BERT input representation. The input embeddings are the sum of the token embeddings, the segmenta-
tion embeddings and the position embeddings.
The NSP task is closely related to representation-
learning objectives used in Jernite et al. (2017) and
Logeswaran and Lee (2018). However, in prior
work, only sentence embeddings are transferred to
down-stream tasks, where BERT transfers all pa-
rameters to initialize end-task model parameters.
Pre-training data The pre-training procedure
largely follows the existing literature on language
model pre-training. For the pre-training corpus we
use the BooksCorpus (800M words) (Zhu et al.,
2015) and English Wikipedia (2,500M words).
For Wikipedia we extract only the text passages
and ignore lists, tables, and headers. It is criti-
cal to use a document-level corpus rather than a
shufﬂed sentence-level corpus such as the Billion
Word Benchmark (Chelba et al., 2013) in order to
extract long contiguous sequences.
3.2 Fine-tuning BERT
Fine-tuning is straightforward since the self-
attention mechanism in the Transformer al-
lows BERT to model many downstream tasks—
whether they involve single text or text pairs—by
swapping out the appropriate inputs and outputs.
For applications involving text pairs, a common
pattern is to independently encode text pairs be-
fore applying bidirectional cross attention, such
as Parikh et al. (2016); Seo et al. (2017). BERT
instead uses the self-attention mechanism to unify
these two stages, as encoding a concatenated text
pair with self-attention effectively includes bidi-
rectional cross attention between two sentences.
For each task, we simply plug in the task-
speciﬁc inputs and outputs into BERT and ﬁne-
tune all the parameters end-to-end. At the in-
put, sentence A and sentence B from pre-training
are analogous to (1) sentence pairs in paraphras-
ing, (2) hypothesis-premise pairs in entailment, (3)
question-passage pairs in question answering, and
(4) a degenerate text- ∅ pair in text classiﬁcation
or sequence tagging. At the output, the token rep-
resentations are fed into an output layer for token-
level tasks, such as sequence tagging or question
answering, and the [CLS] representation is fed
into an output layer for classiﬁcation, such as en-
tailment or sentiment analysis.
Compared to pre-training, ﬁne-tuning is rela-
tively inexpensive. All of the results in the pa-
per can be replicated in at most 1 hour on a sin-
gle Cloud TPU, or a few hours on a GPU, starting
from the exact same pre-trained model. 7 We de-
scribe the task-speciﬁc details in the correspond-
ing subsections of Section 4. More details can be
found in Appendix A.5.
4 Experiments
In this section, we present BERT ﬁne-tuning re-
sults on 11 NLP tasks.
4.1 GLUE
The General Language Understanding Evaluation
(GLUE) benchmark (Wang et al., 2018a) is a col-
lection of diverse natural language understanding
tasks. Detailed descriptions of GLUE datasets are
included in Appendix B.1.
To ﬁne-tune on GLUE, we represent the input
sequence (for single sentence or sentence pairs)
as described in Section 3, and use the ﬁnal hid-
den vector C ∈ RH corresponding to the ﬁrst
input token ([CLS]) as the aggregate representa-
tion. The only new parameters introduced during
ﬁne-tuning are classiﬁcation layer weights W ∈
RK×H, where Kis the number of labels. We com-
pute a standard classiﬁcation loss with C and W,
i.e., log(softmax(CWT )).
7For example, the BERT SQuAD model can be trained in
around 30 minutes on a single Cloud TPU to achieve a Dev
F1 score of 91.0%.
8See (10) in https://gluebenchmark.com/faq.
4176
System MNLI-(m/mm) QQP QNLI SST-2 CoLA STS-B MRPC RTE Average
392k 363k 108k 67k 8.5k 5.7k 3.5k 2.5k -
Pre-OpenAI SOTA 80.6/80.1 66.1 82.3 93.2 35.0 81.0 86.0 61.7 74.0
BiLSTM+ELMo+Attn 76.4/76.1 64.8 79.8 90.4 36.0 73.3 84.9 56.8 71.0
OpenAI GPT 82.1/81.4 70.3 87.4 91.3 45.4 80.0 82.3 56.0 75.1
BERTBASE 84.6/83.4 71.2 90.5 93.5 52.1 85.8 88.9 66.4 79.6
BERTLARGE 86.7/85.9 72.1 92.7 94.9 60.5 86.5 89.3 70.1 82.1
Table 1: GLUE Test results, scored by the evaluation server ( https://gluebenchmark.com/leaderboard).
The number below each task denotes the number of training examples. The “Average” column is slightly different
than the ofﬁcial GLUE score, since we exclude the problematic WNLI set. 8 BERT and OpenAI GPT are single-
model, single task. F1 scores are reported for QQP and MRPC, Spearman correlations are reported for STS-B, and
accuracy scores are reported for the other tasks. We exclude entries that use BERT as one of their components.
We use a batch size of 32 and ﬁne-tune for 3
epochs over the data for all GLUE tasks. For each
task, we selected the best ﬁne-tuning learning rate
(among 5e-5, 4e-5, 3e-5, and 2e-5) on the Dev set.
Additionally, for BERTLARGE we found that ﬁne-
tuning was sometimes unstable on small datasets,
so we ran several random restarts and selected the
best model on the Dev set. With random restarts,
we use the same pre-trained checkpoint but per-
form different ﬁne-tuning data shufﬂing and clas-
siﬁer layer initialization.9
Results are presented in Table 1. Both
BERTBASE and BERTLARGE outperform all sys-
tems on all tasks by a substantial margin, obtaining
4.5% and 7.0% respective average accuracy im-
provement over the prior state of the art. Note that
BERTBASE and OpenAI GPT are nearly identical
in terms of model architecture apart from the at-
tention masking. For the largest and most widely
reported GLUE task, MNLI, BERT obtains a 4.6%
absolute accuracy improvement. On the ofﬁcial
GLUE leaderboard10, BERTLARGE obtains a score
of 80.5, compared to OpenAI GPT, which obtains
72.8 as of the date of writing.
We ﬁnd that BERT LARGE signiﬁcantly outper-
forms BERTBASE across all tasks, especially those
with very little training data. The effect of model
size is explored more thoroughly in Section 5.2.
4.2 SQuAD v1.1
The Stanford Question Answering Dataset
(SQuAD v1.1) is a collection of 100k crowd-
sourced question/answer pairs (Rajpurkar et al.,
2016). Given a question and a passage from
9The GLUE data set distribution does not include the Test
labels, and we only made a single GLUE evaluation server
submission for each of BERTBASE and BERTLARGE .
10https://gluebenchmark.com/leaderboard
Wikipedia containing the answer, the task is to
predict the answer text span in the passage.
As shown in Figure 1, in the question answer-
ing task, we represent the input question and pas-
sage as a single packed sequence, with the ques-
tion using the A embedding and the passage using
the B embedding. We only introduce a sta